ladies and gentlemen senator dick durbin
in the last two weeks you've made
history in presidential politics in
America you're gonna make it again come
this st. Patrick's Day in the city of
Chicago in the state of Illinois and
we're going to give you a chance to lead
our nation so when st. Patrick's Day
comes around I'm gonna be casting my
vote for President Joe Biden and this
young lady here who is Josephine but we
call Joe I'm casting my vote for her too
because your leadership Joe is what's
going to make her life better for years
to come
wish you the best Joe had a great Town
Meeting
good evening and I you're really
fortunate Illinois is fortunate to have
two such incredible senators like a
friend of mine Tammy Duckworth and dick
you're one of the great leaders in the
Senate I'm counting on you pal I'm
counting on and I want to thank you for
both for joining us today and I want to
thank everyone for tuning in look I look
forward to answering your questions
assuming you don't have more technical
difficulties but first let me say I know
that this is an incredibly anxious time
for all our families and my thoughts now
are the families in every state and
quite frankly around the world we're
fighting this coronavirus as well as our
first responders our health care
providers are putting themselves on the
line to try to help people yesterday I
had an opportunity to address the nation
and outline my plan for overcoming this
crisis I laid out a comprehensive public
health response to curb the spread of
disease
get testing and treatment to those who
need it and quickly and I've laid out an
economic response to give American
workers their families small businesses
impacted by this crisis immediate relief
these are steps that can't wait until
inauguration day next year we need
action now we need to be ready to take
additional action as health and economic
aspects of this crisis develop and they
get worse look we need to lead with
science that's the starter we need to
listen to the public health
professionals we need transparency and
we need to restore public trust and
confidence in the US government speaker
Pelosi has stepped up to lead and she
just recently assembled a package to
deliver vital immediate relief for the
American people
this evening the speaker announced she's
reached a deal with the administration
to make testing available for free
provide paid leave for everybody
food assistance for vulnerable Americans
and all Americans should be grateful to
the speaker's leadership and for
minorities sherburn's leadership I've
been the Senate side in this critical
moment look these are important steps
first steps but we have much much more
to do in a long road ahead look I know
that the American people are up to this
challenge as they've always been up to
any challenge we will summon the spirit
of empathy decency and unity in this
country we're going to overcome this
moment but it's going to require
all to be prudent and proactive this is
the responsibility of each of us to
protect our families our co-workers and
our neighbors especially those who are
most vulnerable to serious health
outcomes no campaign events or no
exception that's why we're connecting
virtually today we're gonna have to get
better at the technical side of this no
president can promise to prevent future
outbreaks but I can promise you that
when I'm president we will prepare
better respond better recover better and
will lead with science I'll listen to
the experts and heed their advice we
will rebuild American leadership and
rally the world to meet these global
threats as we did in our administration
it will always always always you get the
truth from me from our administration
this is the responsibility of any
president and I promise you I will meet
that responsibility that's what the
American people are owed we owe that to
you all now in these difficult days
ahead but still lie ahead I know this
country will summon the spirit of
empathy decency and unity we've never
failed in a moment of crisis because in
times of crisis Americans stand as one
volunteers raised their hands to help
neighbors look out for neighbors
businesses take care of their workers so
we'll meet this challenge and we'll do
it together now as I said it's a it's
critical that we allow the public health
officials to lead through this moment
and I want to make sure that's exactly
what we're doing and that's why I'm
going to turn things over to dr. Martha
he was a Surgeon General
he's extremely well-versed in all these
issues he's one of the number of experts
who are on my team and I want to thank
you and and doctor maybe you could have
if we can transfer to you say a few
words thank you so much mr. vice
president thank you I want to thank you
for making the coronavirus like an
important focus for today there's a
great concern all across our country
with good week we've seen dramatic
spread of this virus around the world
but we've also seen a rapid growth in
cases here in the United States we now
have over 2,000 cases and more than 40
deaths
all across our country but we're also
quite limited in our testing so we
suspect that that number is quite higher
and in the coming days we expect to see
more and more cases discovered in more
communities across America that's the
bad news but there is good news as well
because as dangerous as this virus is
despite the fact that it seems to be 10
times more lethal than the flu and
spreads just as easily if not more so we
do know that there are measures we can
take to protect ourselves and others and
I want to take a moment just to recap
what those are in terms of our personal
hygiene washing our hands as simple as
it is is extraordinarily powerful in
preventing us from getting sick but also
and preventing us from taking this virus
on our hands and on our person to other
people who might be more vulnerable
using hand sanitizer whenever you can
when you're not able to wash your hands
is important not touching your face
especially when you're outside and
cleaning surfaces especially your keys
and your phones are very important
because we know the virus can live on
surfaces like metal and other surfaces
for many hours at a time but we also
know that as we're waiting to discover
just how many cases are in the u.s. that
we can't just sit back and focus just on
our own hygiene we've got to think more
broadly about what measures we can take
in our communities in order to decrease
spread and that's why you're seeing a
lot more talk about mitigation which a
big part of which is social distancing I
like to think of this more as a physical
distance thing because I think we still
gotta find ways to maintain our social
ties with each other that's really
important but that distancing means that
we should telework whenever possible
instead of going in to work it means
that we should rethink how we greet
people instead of going for a
traditional and shake that's simply a
hand on the heart or non other
non-contact greeting is important and as
much as we all love going to concerts
inches large sporting events those kind
of events can be places where this virus
can spread and so we have to pull back
on those as painful as that may be in
order to protect our larger communities
I do want to say though that
finally the piece of this that it's
important to emphasize is that we cannot
get through the corona virus pandemic
alone we can't do that as individuals we
can't do that solely as the United
States we're gonna have to depend on
each other we're gonna have to look out
for each other including the elderly the
vulnerable people who may run out of
food or who may have difficulties
getting help when they need it but who
may depend on us to check in on them and
make sure they're okay and as a country
obviously we know that what happens in
one country halfway around the world in
terms of an outbreak can affect us in a
moment's notice and we have to work in
partnership with other countries to make
sure that we're safe I want to thank all
of you for for participating here and as
you think about going out to vote I want
to just remind you if you're going to a
polling station to get in and out
quickly make sure you wash your hands
when you come back and make sure that
certainly if you're sick that you don't
go out because you could expose other
people and if you're in a higher risk
category if you are above the age of 60
and if you have illnesses like diabetes
or heart disease and are in general and
frail health I would recommend that you
call your county election commission to
make sure you can take advantage of any
emergency measures they have in place to
allow you to vote via mail so thank you
all so much for your attention to this
topic for helping protect our
communities and I'm going to turn it
back over to Gabrielle for the Q&A thank
you everyone
if you have questions please raise your
hand utilizing the raise hand feature
online if you're called in hit star nine
to be able to raise your hand
via the phone well but uh well let
questions populate for one minute and
then we will select participants we're
gonna take the next question from
Georgia Johnson Georgia you're live well
one of my questions was as far as Joe
Biden is concerned what exactly will he
do to accommodate those of us who are
Bernie Sanders supporters if we're going
to turn from Ernie M what is he gonna do
to satisfy us Bernie and I agree on a
whole range of issues we agree on the
essence of how would have proceeded on
on the issue of climate change we agree
in education we have a disagreement on
how rapidly we can move toward universal
health care but what I'm going to do is
Bernie and I are going to work together
and if he's the nominee I commit that I
will support him heavily throughout do
everything I can and he said the same
thing and but we across the board
there's a whole range of things we agree
on from dealing with student debt to
making sure everyone has adequate health
care affordable health care and that
those who can't afford it get it for
free find ourselves in a position where
we reunite the world by going and
dealing with our allies and let them
know our word can be kept making sure
that those who are adversaries know that
we're back and we're going to keep our
sacred commitments than our allies we're
gonna work in the direction of making
sure that we make sure that everyone in
fact has access to education we're gonna
for example one of the things that I
think burning I'll agree on I I am I'm
going to endure I've endorsed Elizabeth
Warren's bankruptcy proposal which in
fact goes further allows for student
debt to be relieved in bankruptcy
provides for a whole range of other
issues that allows us to in fact impact
on how people are dealing with their
circumstances so there's a whole range
of things we agree on but I would hope
that they would take a look and this be
a matter of alternatives and you know
you may not agree with every detail that
I am I proposed but the fact is that
it's awfully difficult to conclude that
I'm anywhere near Donald Trump my team
and I believe the people backing me will
back Bernie and I hope they'll do the
same thing we are going to take from DNF
pain hi mr. vice president thank you for
taking the time to do this today my
question in is in regard to health care
I understand that you want to expand on
Obamacare and add the public option
could you go into a little bit more
detail about how co-pays
and prescription prices would be
affected by your plan one for those who
in fact cannot afford and have to take
the public option there would be no
co-pays number one number two we in fact
subsidized the Obama plan to a tune of
seven hundred and fifty billion dollars
over the next ten years to provide for
their we know surprise billing no
situation where drug prices can go up
beyond the cost of inflation I set up in
at the Department of Health and I at NIH
a group of experts that are going to
determine whether the bio-based drugs as
opposed to chemical based drugs that are
being coming on market now and only one
or two companies are working with them
and have them set the price the initial
price of that drug again it cannot be
raised beyond the cost of inflation
medical inflation and in addition to
that I make sure that Medicare can
negotiate all drug payments that in fact
they're gonna how much they're gonna pay
and driving down the cost of drugs and
there's many more aspects of that but
the way I do it is providing the public
option and further subsidizing access to
the goal plans that exist within the but
what it doesn't do it doesn't require
you if you have insurance like over 100
million people do who they've negotiated
with their employer that they like very
much they don't have to give it up
they can make that choice but if the
employer cuts the plan they can buy into
the Medicare and if they can't afford it
they can get the Medicare option that is
in my plan we are going to take another
question from Dan Joyce mr. vice
president thank you for taking the time
to do this this has to do with the
current health crisis were in and how
would your health plan deal with this
current health crisis crisis that we're
all facing right now what would be the
advantages of your health plan versus
what we have now given I believe there
are a number of people who feel very
insecure about their health care right
now so I I was just wondering how the
plan that you proposed would be dealing
with this issue right now Dan it would
cover all the
would be associated with the loss of
that you would have in fact any doctors
bill you have any bill in the hospital
bill it would be covered but here's the
main thing I can get this past we can
get this past and when you get a pass
quickly and even Bernie acknowledge is
going to take four years to pass his
plan and then it's going to take longer
time beyond that to get it implemented
we need to assure people we can do this
quickly I was one of the president asked
to go get the votes for Obamacare we got
the votes and I would restore all the
cuts that Trump made in Obamacare adding
the public option providing for the
additional funding that would provide
for no hidden bills etc and I can get it
done I can get it done quickly and
people would be covered but even I can't
do that for another two year another a
year between now and November they're
actually January we're gonna take one
more question from Murray Perkins
good evening mr. president and it has
such a nice ring to it my question to
you is do you how would you know do you
support the Endangered Species Act and
will you prohibit animals from being
hunted and brought into this country for
trophies yes yes and but look I want us
to say something me on that one one of
the things that I did early on in my
career as a u.s. senator was I was one
of the sponsors of the Endangered
Species Act and one of the other things
we've done is we in the state of
Delaware for example set up the Coastal
Zone legislation which means that they
can't build any factories there any any
anything within one mile of the estuary
of the Delaware River and the Atlantic
Ocean and the Chesapeake and so but the
whole point of this is that we can do a
lot to deal with endangered species and
one of the things I would like to raise
is that we have to deal with this and
then Ashe
basis as well because right now for
example we have a thing you know Brazil
has the the Amazon is burning because
they're trying to clear the Amazon in
order to make money in agriculture what
I be doing is organizing the entire
world to say stop now stop doing that we
will pay you twenty billion dollars no
longer to do this because you have an
opportunity to be able to make up for
the loss of being able to have this this
Amazon become farmland but here's the
deal more carbon absorb from the air and
what they call this carbon sink the
Amazon then every bit of carbon that's
admitted in the United States to America
on a daily basis so the point I want to
make is this goes beyond just what we're
gonna do here in this nation we've got
to be able to reach out and make sure
the rest of the world engages we make up
15% of the problem the rest of the world
makes up 85% of the problem including
relating an endangered species and so
one of the things we have to do is
immediately rejoin the Paris climate
Accord which I helped put together and
then the first what I would do is in the
first hundred days invite the major
polluters in the country and their major
abusers of endangered species to the
United States of America and up the ante
on what we have to do there's much we
can do go to Joe Biden calm take a look
at the acts I would take immediately
relative to the environment and
endangered species as well as go to Joe
Biden come and take a look at the number
of proposals I've laid out to deal with
the virus as well I'm sorry this has
been such a disjointed effort here
because of the connections but there's a
lot more to say but I've already
probably said too much to you thank you
to everybody for joining
you know we appreciate this and we do
apologize for the technical difficulties
that we had remember that Election Day
is March 17th
if you want to find out more information
about voting please go to Joe Biden comm
or text Jack's joined at 303 304
everyone and have a great night